Clarify String named argument combinations (#3262)
modelica/ModelicaSpecification: chapters/operatorsandexpressions.tex

  \lstinline!Boolean leftJustified = true!: If true, the converted result is left justified in the string; if false it is right justified in the string.
\item
  \lstinline!Integer significantDigits = 6!: Number of significant digits in the result string.

>   Only allowed when formatting a \lstinline!Real! value.

Reviewer: Should we clarify that String(4, format="4d") is allowed here as well? (Since the integer is converted to real.)

Author: To me it wasn't even clear that implicit conversion to `Real` would happen in this case, due to the existence of a form of `String` with matching type in the position of the `4`.  It would be good to get language group agreement on this, and clarify one way or another.

Author: By the way, I had also expected this to be an error: `String(4, significantDigits = 4)`

Reviewer 2: > By the way, I had also expected this to be an error: `String(4, significantDigits = 4)`

I would expect the standard type coercion ([10.6.13](https://specification.modelica.org/master/arrays.html#standard-type-coercion)) to be applied in that case, so that it's converted to `String(4.0, significantDigits = 4)`.

Author: While I can see that 10.6.13 could be interpreted this way, I don't think it's obvious that it must be interpreted this way due to the fact that `String` has another form that immediately accepts the `Integer` value.  If we'd say this is allowed, it feels contradictory (at least on the surface) to state that `significantDigits` is only allowed for `Real`.

If there's room for interpretation, why not go with the simpler and more strict view that `significantDigits` isn't allowed since the first argument is an `Integer`?  Do we fear that anyone would actually miss the possibility to pass an `Integer` expression in combination with `significantDigits`?

Reviewer 2: The `Integer` overload of `String` is not a valid match since it doesn't have the  `significantDigits` parameter, so there's only one valid overload in that case which is the one that takes a `Real`.

Author: Sure, that's the other interpretation.  I'm just not sure it has to be the only possible interpretation at the moment.  I mean, do we have any other examples to look at where the presence of a named argument determines how to perform type conversion on other arguments in a function call?

Reviewer: > To me it wasn't even clear that implicit conversion to `Real` would happen in this case, due to the existence of a form of `String` with matching type in the position of the `4`. It would be good to get language group agreement on this, and clarify one way or another.

To me that was given due to "d" and "x" being discussed. Saying that `String(4.0, format="5d")` is allowed, but not `String(4, format="5d")` would be weird.

Author: Aha, I think I can see the source of the confusion now:
> For integral values it is also allowed to use the ‘d’, ‘i’, ‘o’, ‘x’, ‘X’, ‘u’, and ‘c’ type field specifiers

That is, we actually seem to be missing the `Integer` case in the synopsis:
```
String(i, format = s)
```

Should we add it, and see how that affects the rest of the presentation?

Author: > > I mean, do we have any other examples to look at where the presence of a named argument determines how to perform type conversion on other arguments in a function call?
> 
> Yes, [overloaded operators](https://specification.modelica.org/master/overloaded-operators.html#matching-function).

What I see in https://specification.modelica.org/master/overloaded-operators.html#overloaded-string-conversions is that one should start by looking at the type of the first argument, and then find a matching function based on the remaining arguments.

Reviewer 2: I would interpret it more that if the first argument is one of the builtin types then the matching `String` overload is selected. How that is done is not actually specified, but the only rules we really have for that is the ones in 14.2.

However, I realized that there's one issue with the rules in 14.2 which is that it says that `Integer` and `Real` should be treated as the same type, which is not actually what we implement in OpenModelica. We prefer an exact match over a match that does type casting, otherwise it doesn't work for functions that have overloads for both `Integer` and `Real`. But that's mostly because we use this for any builtin function that's overloaded, which is not strictly specified.

So perhaps this is beyond the scope of this ticket and we need to resolve how overloaded builtin functions should actually behave first.

Reviewer 2: Also, adding `String(i, format = s)` would be necessary if we want different sets of conversion specifiers for `Integer` and `Real`. But even if we do that I think we still need to clarify how overloading of builtin functions should work.

Author: > but for compatibility allowing both int and double formatting for both integer and real arguments, so that String(40000000, format="g") and String(4.0, format="d") both work.

I don't see a clear need to add support for `String(4.0, format="d")`, as this only corresponds to this strange parenthesized remark:
> (for `Real` values a tool may round, truncate or use a different format if the integer conversion specifiers are used)

I mean, it hasn't even been clearly defined what to expect of this mismatched situation in the past, so wouldn't it be better to instead go in the other direction and just drop this vague remark?  As the consequence of dropping it would be that it isn't allowed at all, backwards compatibility fighters might prefer to add back a deprecation statement:
> A deprecated feature is that a `Real` value can also be formatted using one of the format specifiers for `Integer` values, although exactly what to output in this case is not defined.

Author: A nice way to interpret `String(42, format="g")` would be that the `Integer` case of `String` is responsible for processing the `"g"` format by conversion to `double` _inside_ the operator's implementation. Thus, there is no need for an implicit conversion to `Real` already in the argument _given to_ the operator.

The same approach could be taken if we wanted to support `String(42, significantDigits = 4)`: Just add extends the `Integer` value case to also accept the `significantDigits` option.

With these two steps, maybe we wouldn't need to sort out the general case of overloaded operator resolution when named arguments are present or when some argument's value could determine the expected type of another argument.  However, I am still not sure it's a good idea to allow `String(42, significantDigits = 4)`, but getting rid of this would either require diving into the operator overload question, or require a special statement about how the overloading of `String` works.

>   Only allowed when formatting a \lstinline!Real! value (and \lstinline!format! is not provided).

Reviewer 2: The last part about format applies to all of the options, so I think it should either be removed (it's already clear from the synopsis that using format is a different overload that doesn't take options) or clarified above the option list so it applies to all of them.

  \lstinline!(if leftJustified then "-" else "") + String(minimumLength) + "d"!
\end{itemize}

> The ANSI-C style \lstinline!format! string (which cannot be combined with any of the other named arguments) consists of a single conversion specifier without the leading \%.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ANSI-C style \lstinline!format! string (which cannot be combined with any of the other named arguments) contains a single conversion specifier without the leading \%, and optionally also flags, width, and precision specifiers.
```
The intent was to support `format="+4.17g"`. The _one_ conversion specifier is just to clarify that you cannot write `format="g d"` (intended for a real and an integer) or `format=""`.

Reviewer: There were more problems: skipping this one.

> The ANSI-C style \lstinline!format! string (which cannot be combined with any of the other named arguments) consists of a single conversion specifier without the leading \%.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ANSI-C style \lstinline!format! string (which cannot be combined with any of the other named arguments) consists of a single conversion specification without the leading \%, and it may optionally include flags, minimum field width, and precision specifiers.
```
The terminology is that "%+4.17g" is a conversion specification and "g" is the conversion character.
(Same from K&R and n1570.)

Reviewer: The "and it may..." could possibly be dropped.

Author: OK, I changed to the original terminology, even though I'm not sure it's the most widely recognized nowadays.  I think we can leave out the _and it may_ to keep the sentence short, and because it is sort of explained in the same paragraph anyway.  Resolving.

> It shall not contain a length field specifier, and shall not use `\lstinline!*!' for width and/or precision.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It shall not contain a length modifier, and shall not use `\lstinline!*!' for width and/or precision.
```
K&R calls it length modifier, and as far as I can tell so does the C-standard (at least n1570 has a similar text).
A typical length modifier is `l` as in `ld` when writing a long int and not an int.

> For all numeric values the type field specifiers `\lstinline!f!', `\lstinline!e!', `\lstinline!E!', `\lstinline!g!', `\lstinline!G!' are allowed.
> For integral values it is also allowed to use the `\lstinline!d!', `\lstinline!i!', `\lstinline!o!', `\lstinline!x!', `\lstinline!X!', `\lstinline!u!', and `\lstinline!c!' type field specifiers (for non-integral values a tool may round, truncate or use a different format if the integer conversion characters are used).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For all numeric values the conversion specifiers `\lstinline!f!', `\lstinline!e!', `\lstinline!E!', `\lstinline!g!', `\lstinline!G!' are allowed.
For integral values it is also allowed to use the `\lstinline!d!', `\lstinline!i!', `\lstinline!o!', `\lstinline!x!', `\lstinline!X!', `\lstinline!u!', and `\lstinline!c!' conversion specifiers (for non-integral values a tool may round, truncate or use a different format if the integer conversion specifiers are used).
```
That character is the "conversion specifier".

Author: Before applying this change, I think we should just take a look at some relevant modern references for the terminology.  Also, _type field specifier_ has the advantage of being more distinct from _conversion specification_.

References with terminology similar to _type field specifier_:
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Printf_format_string "Type field"
- [Microsoft](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/cpp/c-runtime-library/format-specification-syntax-printf-and-wprintf-functions?view=msvc-170#type-field-characters) "Type field characters"
- [IBM](https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/i/7.2?topic=functions-printf-print-formatted-characters) "type character"

References with terminology similar to _conversion specifier_:
- [N1570](https://port70.net/~nsz/c/c11/n1570.html#7.21.6) "conversion specifier"

Other:
- [cplusplus.com](https://cplusplus.com/reference/cstdio/printf/) "specifier character" (and uses _format specifier_ for what we currently refer to as _format specification_)

Feel free to mention more references, and I'll add them by updating this comment.  So far, however, it looks to me as if _type field specifier_ is the winner even though it isn't the original terminology.

Reviewer: Well, the Wikipedia article is for multiple languages, and the Microsoft article is all over the place and also calls it "type conversion specifier character", and discusses "floating-point conversion specifier" (a, A, e, E, f, F, g, G).

And https://en.cppreference.com/w/c/io/fprintf calls it conversion specifier.
Thus I prefer to use the name in the standard.

  \lstinline!(if leftJustified then "-" else "") + String(minimumLength) + "d"!
\end{itemize}

The ANSI-C style \lstinline!format! string (which cannot be combined with any of the other named arguments) consists of a single conversion specification without the leading \%.
It shall not contain a length modifier, and shall not use `\lstinline!*!' for width and/or precision.
For both \lstinline!Real! and \lstinline!Integer! values, the conversion specifiers `\lstinline!f!', `\lstinline!e!', `\lstinline!E!', `\lstinline!g!', `\lstinline!G!' are allowed.

> For \lstinline!Integer! values it is also allowed to use the `\lstinline!d!', `\lstinline!i!', `\lstinline!o!', `\lstinline!x!', `\lstinline!X!', `\lstinline!u!', and `\lstinline!c!' conversion specifiers (for \lstinline!Real! values a tool may round, truncate or use a different format if the integer conversion specifiers are used).

Author: While many things have now been clarified, this remains problematic. We're not saying that `String(100 * Constants.pi, format = "X")` is allowed, but still say it is OK return pretty much anything in this case.  How can this be a meaningful specification?

When we're at it, cleaning up `String`, why not get rid of this with a deprecation?
```suggestion
For \lstinline!Integer! values it is also allowed to use the `\lstinline!d!', `\lstinline!i!', `\lstinline!o!', `\lstinline!x!', `\lstinline!X!', `\lstinline!u!', and `\lstinline!c!' conversion specifiers.
Using the \lstinling!Integer! conversion specifiers for a \lstinline!Real! value is a deprecated feature without defined result.
```

Reviewer: I can see some benefit in doing that, but I think it is best to discuss it in a separate PR focused on that topic so that we can close this one.
